CodeCultivation
Object-Oriented Garden Systems

Summary: Build a comprehensive digital garden ecosystem while discovering advanced
Python concepts. Create tools to manage community gardens efficiently through
data-driven approaches.
Version: 2.2

Contents
I

Foreword

2

II

AI Instructions

3

III

Introduction

5

IV

General Instructions

6

V

Exercise 0: Planting Your First Seed

7

VI

Exercise 1: Garden Data Organizer

9

VII

Exercise 2: Plant Growth Simulator

11

VIII

Exercise 3: Plant Factory

13

IX

Exercise 4: Garden Security System

15

X

Exercise 5: Specialized Plant Types

17

XI

Exercise 6: Garden Analytics Platform

19

XII

Turn in and Submission

21

1

Chapter I
Foreword
In the digital age, even gardens need smart systems.
A wise gardener once said: "You can’t plant flowers and then pull them up every day to
see how the roots are doing." The same applies to code—sometimes the most beautiful
growth happens when we trust the process and let our programs develop naturally, layer
by layer.
Behind every thriving community garden lies a network of relationships. Plants don’t
grow in isolation; they form communities where each species contributes something unique
while sharing common needs. Some plants protect others from pests, some fix nitrogen in
the soil, and others provide shade for delicate seedlings. This interconnected web of mutual support mirrors how well-designed software systems work—individual components
with distinct roles, working together harmoniously.
Just as a master gardener knows that healthy soil produces healthy plants, experienced
programmers understand that well-structured code grows into robust applications. You’ll
discover that organizing your code is like planning a garden: some elements need protection, others need room to grow, and the best systems emerge when everything has its
proper place and purpose.
In this project, you’ll cultivate your programming skills while building tools that could
genuinely help community gardens flourish. Every line of code you write is a seed planted
in the digital soil of possibility.

2

Chapter II
AI Instructions
● Context
During your learning journey, AI can assist with many different tasks. Take the time to
explore the various capabilities of AI tools and how they can support your work. However, always approach them with caution and critically assess the results. Whether it’s
code, documentation, ideas, or technical explanations, you can never be completely sure
that your question was well-formed or that the generated content is accurate. Your peers
are a valuable resource to help you avoid mistakes and blind spots.

● Main message
☛ Use AI to reduce repetitive or tedious tasks.
☛ Develop prompting skills — both coding and non-coding — that will benefit your
future career.
☛ Learn how AI systems work to better anticipate and avoid common risks, biases,
and ethical issues.
☛ Continue building both technical and power skills by working with your peers.
☛ Only use AI-generated content that you fully understand and can take responsibility
for.

● Learner rules:
• You should take the time to explore AI tools and understand how they work, so
you can use them ethically and reduce potential biases.
• You should reflect on your problem before prompting — this helps you write clearer,
more detailed, and more relevant prompts using accurate vocabulary.
• You should develop the habit of systematically checking, reviewing, questioning,
and testing anything generated by AI.
• You should always seek peer review — don’t rely solely on your own validation.
3

CodeCultivation

Object-Oriented Garden Systems

● Phase outcomes:
• Develop both general-purpose and domain-specific prompting skills.
• Boost your productivity with effective use of AI tools.
• Continue strengthening computational thinking, problem-solving, adaptability, and
collaboration.

● Comments and examples:
• You’ll regularly encounter situations — exams, evaluations, and more — where
you must demonstrate real understanding. Be prepared, keep building both your
technical and interpersonal skills.
• Explaining your reasoning and debating with peers often reveals gaps in your understanding. Make peer learning a priority.
• AI tools often lack your specific context and tend to provide generic responses. Your
peers, who share your environment, can offer more relevant and accurate insights.
• Where AI tends to generate the most likely answer, your peers can provide alternative perspectives and valuable nuance. Rely on them as a quality checkpoint.
✓ Good practice:
I ask AI: “How do I test a sorting function?” It gives me a few ideas. I try them out
and review the results with a peer. We refine the approach together.
✗ Bad practice:
I ask AI to write a whole function, copy-paste it into my project. During peerevaluation, I can’t explain what it does or why. I lose credibility — and I fail my
project.
✓ Good practice:
I use AI to help design a parser. Then I walk through the logic with a peer. We catch
two bugs and rewrite it together — better, cleaner, and fully understood.
✗ Bad practice:
I let Copilot generate my code for a key part of my project. It compiles, but I can’t
explain how it handles pipes. During the evaluation, I fail to justify and I fail my
project.

4

Chapter III
Introduction
Welcome to Code Cultivation!
Building on your Python fundamentals from the first activity, you’ll now tackle more complex programming challenges through creating a comprehensive garden data management
system. This project introduces advanced concepts that make Python a powerful tool for
modeling real-world systems.
You’ll work on:
• Understanding how Python programs are structured and executed
• Organizing complex data structures efficiently
• Creating reusable code components
• Building systems that can adapt and extend
• Protecting data integrity in collaborative environments
• Designing scalable software architectures
Each exercise builds upon previous ones, creating a complete digital garden ecosystem
by the end.

IMPORTANT: This module starts with basic Python program structure,
then progresses to Object-Oriented Programming. Each exercise should
contain the requested definitions and any required code. You may
include simple test code at the bottom of each file using if __name__
== "__main__": blocks for your own testing.

5

Chapter IV
General Instructions
• Your code must be written in Python 3.10+
• Your code must respect the flake8 linter standards
• Each exercise must be in its own file
• Use proper naming conventions: classes in PascalCase, functions and variables in
snake_case
• All functions and methods must include type hints
• You don’t need to handle input validation unless explicitly mentioned
• Focus on demonstrating programming concepts clearly
• Your programs must always run without errors

Digital Garden Ecosystem Note: This project focuses on Python
programming concepts, starting from basic program structure and
progressing to Object-Oriented Programming. Each exercise introduces
new features while building a cohesive garden management system.
Later exercises will reuse concepts from earlier ones.

Object-Oriented Programming: Starting from Exercise 1, all exercises
in this module require the use of classes. Python keywords such as
’class’ and ’def’ are fundamental language features and do not need
to be listed in the authorized functions for each exercise.

6

Chapter V
Exercise 0: Planting Your First Seed
Exercise0
ft_garden_intro
Directory: ex0/
Files to Submit: ft_garden_intro.py
Authorized: print()

Before we can build complex garden management systems, you need to understand how
Python programs work.
Every Python program needs a starting point - a place where execution begins. Just like
planting your first seed in a garden, this is where your programming journey begins!
Your task is to create your very first Python program that displays information about a
plant in your garden.
Requirements:
• Create a program that runs when executed directly
• Use the special if __name__ == "__main__": pattern
• Store plant information in simple variables (name, height, age)
• Display the plant information using print()

7

CodeCultivation

Object-Oriented Garden Systems

Example:
$> python3 ft_garden_intro.py
=== Welcome to My Garden ===
Plant: Rose
Height: 25cm
Age: 30 days
=== End of Program ===

This is your first seed planted in the garden of Python programming!
Understanding how programs start and execute is fundamental before
moving to more complex concepts like functions and classes.

Note: Starting from this exercise and for all following exercises in this module (and
future Python projects), you are allowed to use if __name__ == "__main__": blocks
for testing your code. This pattern will not be repeated in the authorized functions list
of subsequent exercises, but remains available throughout.
What happens if you remove the if __name__ == "__main__": line?
Try it and observe the difference! Also, have you noticed that some
Python files start with a special line beginning with #!? Research
what this "shebang" line does and why it might be useful for making
your scripts executable directly.

8

Chapter VI
Exercise 1: Garden Data Organizer
Exercise1
ft_garden_data
Directory: ex1/
Files to Submit: ft_garden_data.py
Authorized: print(), range()

The community garden needs to track multiple plants with their information. You need
to store and display data for several plants efficiently.
Each plant has:
• A name
• Height in centimeters
• Age in days
Create a program that manages data for at least 3 different plants and displays their
information in an organized way.
You must create a Plant class that serves as a blueprint for any plant, rather than handling
each one individually. For example, every plant might have a name, height, and age but you’ll need a way to organize this data that makes sense
.
Required: Create a Plant blueprint that can represent any plant with its attributes.

9

CodeCultivation

Object-Oriented Garden Systems

Example:
$> python3 ft_garden_data.py
=== Garden Plant Registry ===
Rose: 25cm, 30 days old
Sunflower: 80cm, 45 days old
Cactus: 15cm, 120 days old

How are you currently storing plant information?
might arise with more plants?

10

What challenges

Chapter VII
Exercise 2: Plant Growth Simulator
Exercise2
ft_plant_growth
Directory: ex2/
Files to Submit: ft_plant_growth.py
Authorized: print(), range()

The garden manager wants to simulate plant growth over time. You need to track how
plants change and provide operations to modify their state.
Requirements:
• Reuse your Plant class from Exercise 1
• Plants need to be able to grow() and age() - think about what actions a plant can
perform
• You’ll need a way to get_info() about the current plant status
• Simulate a week of growth for multiple plants
• Consider how plants should change over time through their own actions
Your program should show plants changing over time. Think about giving your plants
behaviors they can perform on themselves.

11

CodeCultivation

Object-Oriented Garden Systems

Example:
$> python3 ft_plant_growth.py
=== Day 1 ===
Rose: 25cm, 30 days old
=== Day 7 ===
Rose: 31cm, 36 days old
Growth this week: +6cm

How are you handling the operations on plant data?
repetition in your code?

12

Is there

Chapter VIII
Exercise 3: Plant Factory
Exercise3
ft_plant_factory
Directory: ex3/
Files to Submit: ft_plant_factory.py
Authorized: print(), range()

The garden center needs to create many plants quickly using your Plant class with
different starting values. You need to streamline the plant creation process and initialize
them properly.
Requirements:
• Plants need to be created with their initial information (name, starting height,
starting age)
• Each plant should be ready to use immediately after construction
• Create at least 5 different plants with varying characteristics
• Display all created plants in an organized format
• Think about how you can streamline the plant creation process
Consider how you might set up plants with their starting values efficiently. What would
make creating many plants easier?

13

CodeCultivation

Object-Oriented Garden Systems

Example:
$> python3 ft_plant_factory.py
=== Plant Factory Output ===
Created: Rose (25cm, 30 days)
Created: Oak (200cm, 365 days)
Created: Cactus (5cm, 90 days)
Created: Sunflower (80cm, 45 days)
Created: Fern (15cm, 120 days)
Total plants created: 5

How are you currently initializing your plants?
efficient way to set them up?

14

Is there a more

Chapter IX
Exercise 4: Garden Security System
Exercise4
ft_garden_security
Directory: ex4/
Files to Submit: ft_garden_security.py
Authorized: print(), range()

The garden manager is concerned about data integrity. Some volunteers accidentally
corrupted plant data by setting invalid values (negative heights, impossible ages). You
need to create a secure system that protects and encapsulates sensitive data.
Requirements:
• Create a SecurePlant that protects its data from corruption
• Provide controlled ways to modify plant data: set_height(), set_age()
• Provide safe ways to access plant data: get_height(), get_age()
• Ensure plant height cannot be negative through validation
• Ensure plant age cannot be negative through validation
• Print error messages when invalid values are attempted
• Think about encapsulation - protecting important data from direct access
Consider how you might create a system that validates data before storing it, ensuring
data integrity.

15

CodeCultivation

Object-Oriented Garden Systems

Example:
$> python3 ft_garden_security.py
=== Garden Security System ===
Plant created: Rose
Height updated: 25cm [OK]
Age updated: 30 days [OK]
Invalid operation attempted: height -5cm [REJECTED]
Security: Negative height rejected
Current plant: Rose (25cm, 30 days)

How can you protect your data from being accidentally corrupted?
What mechanisms could you put in place?

16

Chapter X
Exercise 5: Specialized Plant Types
Exercise5
ft_plant_types
Directory: ex5/
Files to Submit: ft_plant_types.py
Authorized: super(), print(), range()

The garden now needs to handle different types of plants: flowers, trees, and vegetables.
Each type has unique characteristics but inherits common plant features from their parent category.
Requirements:
• Start with a base Plant that has common features (name, height, age)
• Create specialized types: Flower, Tree, and Vegetable
• Each specialized type should inherit the basic plant features
• Flower needs: color attribute and ability to bloom()
• Tree needs: trunk_diameter and ability to produce_shade()
• Vegetable needs: harvest_season and nutritional_value
• When creating specialized plants, call the parent setup with super().__init__()
• Create at least 2 instances of each plant type
• Avoid duplicating common plant code across different specialized types
Think about family relationships in nature - how do species share traits while having
unique characteristics?

17

CodeCultivation

Object-Oriented Garden Systems

Example:
$> python3 ft_plant_types.py
=== Garden Plant Types ===
Rose (Flower): 25cm, 30 days, red color
Rose is blooming beautifully!
Oak (Tree): 500cm, 1825 days, 50cm diameter
Oak provides 78 square meters of shade
Tomato (Vegetable): 80cm, 90 days, summer harvest
Tomato is rich in vitamin C

Notice how much code you might be duplicating. Each plant type
shares common features but has unique characteristics. Think about
family relationships in nature—how do species share traits?

How are you handling the common features shared by all plant types?
Is there a way to avoid repeating the same code by creating a family
tree of related types?

18

Chapter XI
Exercise 6: Garden Analytics
Platform
Exercise6
ft_garden_analytics
Directory: ex6/
Files to Submit: ft_garden_analytics.py
Authorized: super(), print(), range(), staticmethod(), classmethod()

Build a comprehensive garden data analytics platform that processes and analyzes garden data. This system needs to handle complex data relationships and provide detailed
analytics using nested components and inheritance chains.
Requirements:
• Create a GardenManager that can handle multiple gardens
• Include a helper GardenStats inside your manager for calculating statistics
• Build a plant family tree: Plant → FloweringPlant → PrizeFlower
• Include a method create_garden_network() that works on the manager type itself
• Add utility functions that don’t need specific garden data
• Show different types of methods: instance methods, class-level methods, and utility
functions
• Each garden should track plant collections and statistics
• Use your nested statistics helper to calculate analytics
• Organize everything within appropriate structures - avoid scattered global functions
Consider how you might organize complex systems with multiple interacting components.
What happens when you need different types of methods?
19

CodeCultivation

Object-Oriented Garden Systems

Example:
$> python3 ft_garden_analytics.py
=== Garden Management System Demo ===
Added Oak Tree to Alice's garden
Added Rose to Alice's garden
Added Sunflower to Alice's garden
Alice is helping all plants grow...
Oak Tree grew 1cm
Rose grew 1cm
Sunflower grew 1cm
=== Alice's Garden Report ===
Plants in garden:
- Oak Tree: 101cm
- Rose: 26cm, red flowers (blooming)
- Sunflower: 51cm, yellow flowers (blooming), Prize points: 10
Plants added: 3, Total growth: 3cm
Plant types: 1 regular, 1 flowering, 1 prize flowers
Height validation test: True
Garden scores - Alice: 218, Bob: 92
Total gardens managed: 2

This exercise brings together all the programming patterns you’ve
learned throughout the project. You will be evaluated on your
understanding of how different components interact and organize
themselves within a complex system.

How do you organize complex systems with multiple interacting
components? What happens when you need different types of methods
that belong to the class itself rather than individual instances?

20

Chapter XII
Turn in and Submission
Turn in your assignment in your Git repository as usual. Only the work inside your repository will be evaluated during the defense. Don’t hesitate to double check the names of
your files to ensure they are correct.

During evaluation, you may be asked to explain programming concepts,
demonstrate inheritance relationships, or extend your code with new
functionality. Make sure you understand the principles behind your
implementations.

You need to return only the files requested by the subject of
this project. Focus on clean, well-documented code that clearly
demonstrates programming principles.

21

